---
title: delight
date: 2017-12-25 08:30:00 -05:00
published: false
---

>AM: In the reading and writing life, delight, for me, is where the mystery lies. Easy enough to figure out how scenes of violence or tragedy or titillation or grossness or even sentimentality can move us, but how the written word elicits delight—what Nabokov calls that shiver in the spine— is much harder to calculate and define. What makes a sentence, a phrase, a moment, or a scene delightful? Something about recognizing the truth in it, something about hearing the music in it, something about understanding, intuitively perhaps, that the words are just right. It’s not a matter of content, or even context—delight is not limited to scenes or descriptions of happiness or beauty—but of aesthetic appreciation of the thing (sentence, phrase, scene, detail, story) itself, the art of it. As a reader, I find it’s that moment when I want to stop reading, and also that moment when I know I can’t; it’s when I want to buttonhole someone and say, “Listen to this,” while at the same time hoping that no fellow human will intrude and make me lift my eyes from the page. It’s recognizing something you’ve always known—or have always seen or have always felt—as if for the first time, all the while understanding that you would never have known or seen or felt this if it weren’t for the writer’s words. I can’t say delight is what I look for in my reading, more accurate to say that it’s what takes me by surprise and reminds me why I love the literary arts above all others.
>
>As a writer, I’m too busy (and worried) to experience that delight while composing my own work, although, of course, I hope a reader will find something of it when the work is complete. But I do try to figure out where in their experiences certain characters of mine, who are not necessarily readers, and certainly (so far) not writers or artists, find an equivalent sensation: of delight, of astonishment, of whatever it is that briefly—and brevity seems essential—reassures us, connects us, sends a shiver of inarticulate recognition down our spines: Oh, yes: life.



https://www.instapaper.com/read/996673856