---
title: disability, reciprocity, justice
date: 2018-12-05 11:28:00 -05:00
published: false
---

I read Michael Berube's book when my son was just an infant, thanks to a friend putting it into my hands. I was desperate in those days for some representation of disability that could connect me to stories outside the sentimentalized parenting narratives that were almost the only thing available at that time. Here, said so many well-meaning people—here is the story of a parent who lived to tell the tale of just how happy their child made them, despite all fears to the contrary.

>Two of the most formidable moral philosophers of our time, both of whose work relies explicitly on the ideal of reciprocity, are Jurgen Habermas and John Rawls. Habermas, whose theory usually goes by the name of "communicative action," focuses on the possibility of locating norms of reciprocity in social practices that enable reflection—chiefly, language. The ideal society, for Habermas, resemble an "ideal speech situation" in which all conversants speak freely in an atmosphere free of domination, coercion, or power asymmetry of any kid, and the possibility of imagining such a society resides, interestingly, in the communicative ideal inherent in language itself. Habermas is routinely criticized, of course—from the right, for being a wishful thinker; from the left, for imagining that some kind of "consensus" will emerge from the ideal speech situation. But interestingly enough, neither the critics from the right nor the critics from the left have been able to argue convincingly that the hypothetical "ideal speech situation," in which all humans discourse as equals, is not in fact ideal.
>
>Rawls takes a wholly different approach, but his 1971 book, *A Theory of Justice*, is nonetheless our century's single most compelling challenge to utilitarian philosophy, and the reason for its cogency is that Rawls, like Habermas, imagines the creation of a social contract in which the ideal of reciprocity precedes any other notion of the right or of the good. In the Rawlsian state, people are governed by two overarching principles, each of which has to be interpreted to fit every new situation and context: "First, each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others. Second: social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both (a) reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage, and (b) attached to positions and offices open to all." By contrast, utilitarianism holds that the just society is that which creates the greatest good for the greatest number. For most of my life I've considered that principle sufficient to my own needs, and Jamie's as well—since, as I fondly imagined, any decent conception of "the greatest number" would certainly include Jamie. And yes, utilitarianism, as social philosophy, is vastly preferable to any social Darwinist regime in which the battle always goes to the strong, the bread always to those whose test scores declare them to be wise. It's also many light-years beyond the adolescent, libertarian conception of a regime in which individual freedom supersedes all other claims to "justice" in a local or collective sense.
>
>But Rawls's "formalist critique of utilitarianism is a forceful one, and it rests on three insuperable problems in utilitarian thought. First, utilitarianism permits some individuals to be disadvantaged so that the collective good, averaged over the entire population, can be enhanced. Most egalitarians would think that's all right: We can deprive the luckiest few of some of the fruits of their advantages so that the rest of us can benefit slightly. As Rawls shows, however, there's nothing in utilitarianism to prevent this logic from working the opposite way. Thus, we might achieve the "greatest good" by allowing 10 percent of the population to reap such extraordinary social benefits that the "collective" good of the society is enhanced, per capita, even if the other 90 percent of the population never sees any of these benefits and can only read about them in the papers. Second, utilitarianism, like libertarianism, doesn't challenge irrational selfishness or eugenics; it merely factors those into the mix. As Rawls puts it, in utilitarianism, "social welfare depends directly and solely upon the levels of satisfaction or dissatisfaction of individuals. Thus if men take a certain pleasure in discriminating against one another, in subjecting others to a lesser liberty as a means of enhancing their self-respect, then the satisfaction of those desires must be weighed in our deliberations according to their intensity, or whatever, along with other desires." Rawls's challenge to this is the idea of "justice as fairness," where fairness entails the principles of reciprocity I mentioned above, and where, from the outset, "an individual who finds that he enjoys seeing others in positions of lesser liberty understands that he has no claim whatever to this enjoyment."
>
>Third and last, utilitarianism does not respect individual idiosyncrasy. This seems to be a strange charge to level against utilitarians, especially if you've just charged them with accepting individuals' idiosyncratic desire to discriminate against each other, but as it happens, it follows from the utilitarian conception of the "greatest good." Put it this way: *Who* determines the greatest good, and on what basis? It turns out that the utilitarian answer to these questions assume that societies might be able to deliberate about such matters if they were composed of one single individual. "The striking feature of the utilitarian view of justice," writes Rawls,
>
>*is that it does not matter, except indirectly, how this sum of satisfactions is distributed among individuals any more than it matters, except indirectly, how one man distributes his satisfactions over time. The correct distribution in either case is that which yields the maximum fulfillment...Here we may note a curious anomaly. It is customary to think of utilitarianism as individualistic, ad certainly there are good reasons for this. The utilitarians were strong defenders of liberty and freedom of thought, and they held that the good of society is constituted by the advantages enjoyed by individuals. Yet utilitarianism is not individualistic...in that, by conflating all systems of desires, it applies to society the principle of choice for one man.*
>
>To think this way, says Rawls, "is not to take seriously the plurality and distinctness of individuals."
>
>Here, then, is where Rawls and Habermas might meet. Deliberations about social justice are not a matter of generalizing from one individual, even if that one individual were so infinitely imaginative that she could experience everyone's attachments and desires as her own. Rather, the ideal of social justice is founded on a collective dialogue—or more precisely, polylogue—in which all social actors contribute their notions of individual and collective good. There's no reason to believe that such a polylogue will end in consensus, but there's every reason to believe that procedurally it's the best idea we humans have yet devised for hashing out the essential decisions that determine *what* we will value and why—as well as what we will mean by the world "value." If that's the case, then we would do well to seek the ground for human justice in our capacity to communicate with one another, regardless of whether we have sustained hearing loss in one ear, regardless of whether we are incapable of uttering proper names, regardless of whether we mumble, regardless of whether we communicate by ASL.
>
>Be our alphabets or our vocabularies what they may, it is through the social practice known as language that we might establish the value of a touchdown or of a human life. The "ground" of justice, in this case, is simply our ability to imagine reciprocity as a ground. 

But then he goes on... something here...

>Is this ability inherent in us, etched somewhere in the genome? It's hard to imagine why this question might matter. Who can say why the Earth have birth to creatures who could write books about reciprocity? Geochemists can't even explain why the oxygen composition of Earth's atmosphere has remained stable for the past couple of billion years... SO let's start from the proposition that we can't fully explain why we're here, and let's create for ourselves a new Chain of Being that expresses our sense of how utterly unlikely we are: First, life is epiphenomenal to matter. From our perspective, it's the most fascinating development we can imagine for things like carbon and potassium, but nothing about the structure of carbon or potassium compels the conclusion that the universe's basic elements just won't be satisfied until they've hooked themselves up into chains that can reproduce themselves. Next, as life is epiphenomenal to matter, so is self-reflective intelligence epiphenomenal to life. Once is life is under way on a planet, it's reasonable to expect that conditions will favor self-replicating molecules that can adapt to their environment. But that's no reason to expect that self-replicating molecules should eventually become self-*aware*.
>
>Even in our many representations of human affairs, from Oedipus to Ronald Reagan, we can find no correlation between reflective self-awareness and effective action. Still less is there any reason to link the rise of self-awareness to the rise of language; although the latter might enhance the former, the former doesn't compel the latter. Finally, though we may have evolved, by whatever chance,that sequence of biochelmical reactions which Steven Pinker calls a "language instinct," there's nothing to suggest that a language instinct should also carry with it a *reciprocity* instinct. Our languages may all have an internal grammar for which we are hard-wired, but we were using our many languages for quite a long time before we conceived of societies founded on the idea of "egalitarian reciprocity" or "justice as fairness." All we know about this idea is that it's here...
>
>But once we've gotten used to the idea that we have the capacity to imagine an ideal form of reciprocity, one final question remains: How do we put this idea of "justice" into practice? Here neither Rawls nor Habermas can help my son. Both men, for all their emphasis on reciprocity as the basis of social justice, start from the from the proposition that before we can discuss the idea of the collective good, we have to shed our individual idiosyncrasies, anything that might prevent us from identifying (and identifying *with*) the collective good in the largest possible sense. Habermas imagines a "public sphere" in which all citizens participate as peers, divested of the attributes that divide us, such as race, gender, age, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Rawls, even more stringently, imagines that the founders of the ideally just society know nothing about their own idiosyncrasies, nothing about their own most cherished desires:
>
>*Among the essential features of this situation is that no one knows his place in society, his class position or social status, nor does any one know his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and the like. I shall even assume that the parties do not know their conceptions of the good or their special psychological propensities. The principles of justice are chosen behind a veil of ignorance.*
>
>Neither Rawls nor Habermas is suggesting that justice can only be deliberated by humans without qualities; neither is saying that we cannot come to terms with citizens like James unless we shed all the particularities that make us *us*. They're simply proposing an abstract starting point: If perfect justice is to be envisioned by imperfect human beings, then let us begin by envisioning some hypothetical "neutral" human being who will do the envisioning—a human being who will not even know her own conception of justice.
>
>But from where *we* stand, in my household, knowing what we do about who we are, we think that both Rawls and Habermas are succumbing to a curious Enlightenment fantasy, the idea that once we boil away all the idiosyncrasies and impurities of the irrational human race, we can come up with some perfectly neutral, rational, disinterested character who can play the language-game of justice as if it were a contest in which he or she had no stake. As long as justice depends, even theoretically, on the deliberation of humans who have no interests, no disabilities, no "special psychological propensities," no passionate desires to see the world and to see it in a specific way, then Rawlsian and Habermasian ideas of justice will remain "academic" exercises in the worst sense of the word—the sense we use when we speak of an "academic" question, a question that does not matter. Feminist philosophers like Nancy Fraser and Seyla Benhabib have already made the case for us: If Rawls is right in criticizing utilitarianism for its inability "to take seriously the plurality and distinctness of individuals," then we shouldn't begin to imagine, even provisionally, a system of justice that gets deliberated by "unmarked" individuals who have been theoretically purged of all individual proclivities and predilections. There isn't a chance in the world that [my son] could come to the table independently of "interests," independent of cognitive and social idiosyncrasies legible to all, independent of either a genetic makeup or a social apparatus that constructs him as "abnormal." The society that fosters Jamie's independence *must* start from an understanding of his dependencies, and any viable conception of justice has to take the concrete bodies and "private," idiosyncratic interests of individuals like Jamie into account, or it will be of no account at all.
>
>There was a time when I would have considered any system of "universal justice" hopelessly naive. Indeed, before James was born I frankly didn't think very highly of appeals to our "common humanity."...
>
>Yet we benighted humans possess one crucial characteristic: the desire to communicate, to understand, to put ourselves in some mutual, reciprocal form of contact with one another... For among the most amazing and hopeful things about this species is that its offspring show up, from their day of birth, programmed to receive and transmit even in the most difficult circumstances; the ability to conduct mutual communicative relations is embedded in our material bodies, woven through our double-stranded fibers. Granted, the sociohistorical variables of human communication, like the variables in everything else about us, are more significant and numerous than any genetic determinism can admit. All the same, the ability to communicate lies our software somewhere, and better still, it's a program that teaches itself how to operate each time we use it.
>
>Whether you want to consider reciprocal communication a constant or a variable, though, the point remains that it's a human attribute that requires other people if it's going to work. Among the talents we have, it's one we could stand to develop more fully. It's only natural: among our deepest, strongest impulses is the impulse to mutual cueing. Nothing, nothing will delight James so much as the realization that you have understood him—except the realization that he has understood *you*, and recursively understood his own understanding and yours. Perhaps I could have realized our human stake in mutual realization without James's aid; any number of other humans would have been willing to help me out. But now that I get it, I get it for good. Communication is itself self-replicating. Sign unto others as you'd have them sign unto you. Pass it on.

