---
title: the limits of a social model
date: 2018-12-08 21:12:00 -05:00
published: false
---

When I explain the very broad differences between a medical model of disability and a social model to most general audiences, what commences is a standard grappling with the still-powerful conceptual shift offered by the distinction. That is: most people still have not internalized the idea that disability is not primarily a phenomenon of the individual and his or her body; it's instead a phenomenon of *interaction* between and among bodies and environments. Hearing this distinction tends to be sufficiently powerful as to be an end in itself to conversation, because it's enough to digest, just on its own. 

But the attentive listener to that conversation will be able to raise the more complicated and nuanced oppositions between these models. These matters are richly debated within disability studies—attempting to account for the wildly varied facts of embodiment, the distinctions between disability as a variation of normative experience versus the acquisition of a condition that one would wish away, were it possible. These are the markers of a lively research community, of course! And the debates are long running.

But there is an enduring neglect of cognitive disability in the most visible debates among disability advocates that's worth revisiting. It's been troubling me lately, watching the conversations on Twitter and its ilk: There's a nearly-dogmatic emphasis on disability self-representation as a simple matter of numbers, the literal use of own-voices, and a vociferous rejection of representation outside of the literal first person. 

Michael Bérubé anticipates this issue in his essay from a decade or so ago, "Equality, Freedom, And/Or Justice For All," collected in [*Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy*](https://www.amazon.com/Cognitive-Disability-Challenge-Moral-Philosophy/dp/1405198281/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1544322306&sr=8-1&keywords=cognitive+disability+and+its+challenge+to+moral+philosophy). I've been reading Bérubé more lately in general and am consistently stunned by his capacity to summarize and clarify thorny matters of political theory, both inside and outside disability circles, when they (so often) clash with the inconvenient realities of intellect or cognition:

>It's about time disability studies started reexamining a few of its founding premises—including what is arguably the founding premise, the "social model" of disability that sees disability as an effect of built environments and social relations rather than as a matter of individual bodies and minds. Tom Shakespeare, one of the people responsible for elaborating the social model in the United Kingdom, [recently wrote](https://www.amazon.com/Disability-Studies-Reader-Lennard-Davis/dp/0415630517/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1544323242&sr=8-2&keywords=the+disability+studies+reader) that the social model "has now become a barrier to further progress" in advancing disability rights—partly because it fails to account adequately for people with cognitive disabilities. It is easier, in other words, to speak of a "barrier-free environment" when one is speaking of wheelchairs and ramps than when one is speaking of significant cognitive disabilities. Shakespeare's argument may be overdrawn or premature, for all the instruments agree that most people and most social institutions haven't yet *gotten to* the social model of disability; but then, recognizing the limits of that model is not an argument for jettisoning it altogether.
>
>Relatedly, disability studies in the United States has dramatically under-theorized surrogacy and guardianship, emphasizing the self-representation of people with disabilities and overlooking the position of people with disabilities whose only substantial hope of representation lies in having their wishes—insofar as we can know their wishes—represented by another. The reasons for this under-theorization are numerous: disability studies theorists have tended subtly to emphasize physical over cognitive disabilities, particularly severe cognitive disabilities, in part because you don't find a lot of people with severe cognitive disabilities holding academic positions; autonomy and self-representation remain an alluring ideal even (or especially) for people with disabilities; too strong an emphasis on guardianship seems to entail the further infantilization of people with cognitive disabilities; and in my wing of the humanities, where we have been post-something for quite some time, we are still too accustomed to think in terms of the "indignity of speaking for others," as Gilles Deleuze put it in an oft-cited interview with Michel Foucault. We are, as a result, too reluctant to acknowledge that with regard to people with severe cognitive disabilities, the surest way of recognizing their dignity is to recognize their guardians as people with the right and responsibility of speaking for others. 
>
>If those of us in disability studies are to meet the challenge of cognitive disability, then, we will need to think harder about the limits of the social model—and we will need to think more seriously about the roles of guardians.

