---
title: all fundamentalisms
date: 2024-11-29 19:33:00 -05:00
---

David Bentley Hart, [back in 2013](https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-experience-of-god-being-consciousness-bliss-david-bentley-hart/9372125?ean=9780300209358):

>It is true that a great deal of the rhetoric of the new atheism is often just the confessional rote of materialist fundamentalism (which, like all fundamentalisms, imagines that in fact it represents the side of reason and truth); but it is also true that the new atheism has spring up in a garden of contending fundamentalisms. There would not be so many slapdash popular atheist manifestoes, in all likelihood, if there were not so many soft and inviting targets out there to provoke them: young earth creationists who believe that the two contradictory cosmogonic myths of the early chapters of Genesis are actually a single documentary account of an event that occurred a little over six millennia ago, and that there really was a Noah who built a giant ark to rescue a compendious menagerie from a universal deluge, or Hindu nationalists who insist that Rama's Bridge was actually built by Hanuman's monkeys, and so forth. Here, certainly, the new atheism has opponents against which it is well matched.
>
>It should be noted, though, just out of fairness, that the emergence of fundamentalism in the last century was not some sort of retreat to a more original or primitive form of faith. Certainly the rise of the Christian fundamentalist movement was not a recovery of the Christianity of earlier centuries or of the apostolic church. It was a thoroughly modern phenomenon, a strange and somewhat poignantly pathetic attempt on the part of culturally deracinated Christians, raised without the intellectual or imaginative resources of a living religious civilization, to imitate the evidentiary methods of modern empirical science by taking the Bible as some sort of objective and impeccably consistent digest of historical data. It is of course absurd to treat the Bible in that way — though, frankly, no more absurd than thinking that "science shows that God does not exist" — but it also most definitely *not* the way the Bible was read in the ancient or medieval church.

I know so many Gen X folks whose early adulthood was marked by the charisma of the "new" atheist writers in the 2000's and whose imagination for religion has stayed there, shadow boxing a fundamentalist subculture with their own easy and reductionist logic. I also grew up among many young earth creationists and other fundamentalists — I can't afford to be quite as condescending as Hart is here — but the twin conundrum shapes both of these groups: an utter lack of interest in the ancient tradition itself. The church fathers were completely clear that Genesis, for example, described "figural tales, communicating spiritual mysteries, and not historical records." Hart shows this in multiple sources. But a complete abandon of theological education has colored both modern fundamentalism and its self-styled scientistic enemies:

>I think it is fair to say that the early fundamentalist movement opposed itself to Darwinism not simply because the latter seemed to contradict the biblical story, and not even simply out of dismay at the rise of the eugenics movement or of other forms of "social Darwinism" (though that was definitely one of the issues involved); rather, many genuinely believed that there was some sort of logical conflict between the idea that God had created the world and the idea that terrestrial life had evolved over time. This was and is a view held, of course, by any number of atheists as well. In either case, however, it is a bizarre belief. After all, one assumes that fundamentalist Christians and fundamentalist materialists alike are aware that Christians believe God is the creator of every person; but presumably none of them would be so foolish as to imagine that this means each person is not also the product of a spermatozoon and ovum; surely they grasp that here God's act of creation is understood as the whole event of nature and existence, not as a distinct and causal agency that in some way rivals the natural process of conception. Somehow, though, even in the minds of some Christians, God has come to be understood not as the truly transcendent source and end of all contingent reality, who creates through "donating" being to a natural order that is complete in itself, but only as a kind of supreme mechanical cause located somewhere within the continuum of nature. Which is only to say that, at the far end of modernity, the concept of God is often just as obscure to those who want to believe as to those who want not to. Ours is in many ways a particularly unsubtle age.
