---
title: death, tame and wild
date: 2026-03-15 12:52:00 -04:00
---

>Perhaps the most widely cited historical study on death and dying, Philippe Ariès's *The Hour of Our Death*, makes the claim that dying was once "tame" and has now become "wild." He gives the following example of a tame death: "In 1874, [Madame Pouget] contracted a summer cholera. After four days she asked to see the village priest, who came and wanted to give her the last rites. 'Not yet, Monsieur le Cure; I'll let you know when the time comes.' Two days later: 'Go and tell Monsieur le Cure to bring me Extreme Unction.'" In this very short anecdote, there are two discernable elements of a tame death: "familiar simplicity" and a "public" or, perhaps better, "social" nature. In what sense was Madame Pouget's death familiar or simple? For Ariès, "familiarity refers both to the fact that people were more likely to encounter dead and dying people during their lives and to the fact that they were more likely to know what to do when such encounters occurred. Madame Puget's was a death forewarned by physical symptoms, "which initiated a 'ritual moment' of preparation for dying...a highly choreographed social event." [Philosopher] Daniel Callahan notes the considerable advantage of such familiarity in "the comfort of knowing how to behave publicly in the presence of death — what to say, how to compose one's face, to whom to speak, and when to speak."
>
>[...]
>
>In contrast to this "tame death," what medieval people feared above all was a sudden or secret death. To die suddenly or in isolation "was a vile and ugly death; it was frightening. It seemed a strange and monstrous thing that nobody dared talk about." Such a frightening prospect, according to Ariès, has now become the norm. Death in the hospital...is often lonely, secret, alien, and unwieldy — in short, "wild." Its wildness stems from its asociality.
>
>It might be argued that death in the modern hospital is characteristically *more* public than a death in the home, for there is a greater chance that one will die in front of a group of people. One thinks of the steady stream of nurses, medical students, residents, and specialists that are likely to cycle through one's hospital room on any given day. But death in front of strangers is, for all practical purposes, as solitary as a death in isolation. It is not the mere presence of other people that makes death social but the nature of one's relationship to those others. The relevant relationships are characterized by personal relations and affective bonds, rather than impersonal norms based on market or bureaucratic forces. As Wendell Berry puts it, the hospital is the place where the "world of love" and the "world of efficiency" "come together, but do not meet." It is only the former, and not the latter, that can tame death.

I keep thinking about this passage from Travis Pickell's *[Burdened Agency](https://bookshop.org/p/books/burdened-agency-christian-theology-and-end-of-life-ethics-travis-pickell/08c579e4b12c0e44?ean=9780268208417&next=t)* — the way Ariès's study inverts the idea of tame and wild from, say, a Weberian scheme of modern rationalization. In other words: one might easily think of death in the past as more wild — like "in the wild," among folkways and homes and villages — and a death-in-hospitals as "tamed" by centralized and professionalized healthcare. But it's so interesting to flip these ideas — to consider death *tamed* by its social, ever-present past, and the modern condition of death as one that thrusts into wildness. 