---
title: a time to build
date: 2022-11-10 14:42:00 -05:00
---

Once more with feeling: More people should read Yuval Levin's [A Time to Build](https://www.basicbooks.com/titles/yuval-levin/a-time-to-build/9781541699281/) on the role of institutions in our lives. No matter where your politics stand, Levin offers such lucid and succinct diagnostics on how institutions get corroded — with ample case studies and data that you'll recognize, I promise — and a strong call to individuals to shore up the bounds of our many institutions, despite their historical failures, for the benefit of everyone. 

I hear the objections to Levin's strong institutionalism over and over: It is reliably, predictably, maddeningly chic in progressive-left circles *within elite institutions* to disavow the worth of institutions most strenuously. You can rhetorically "win" any group conversation by suggesting that you're not at all interested in officialdom. The archaic edifices of institutions are *not for you*. You're interested in how ordinary people gather and cooperate, unfettered by rules or regulations or norms. As if that's all there is to say: *Why can't we celebrate and self-organize discontinuous groups of people for their own ends*, you ask? You win if that's your rhetorical stance because it feels, at first glance, correctly anti-elitist to make these claims. 

Leaving aside the thin moral universe in which someone can confidently put their trust in humans utterly ungoverned at scale(!), anti-institutionalism is (still) in vogue because it seems like institutional logic is inherently tied up with a broad-brush Whiteness: gatekeeping, as they say, and punitive hierarchies. Critics want to evoke the many indigenous wisdom traditions of the world as models for *anti*-institutional rule. But I suspect these thinkers are making an erroneous, ahistorical admixture: built of 1) the contemporary "expressive individualism" that is the unquestioned good of our time — the self and its specific, fully realized wishes served above all — mixed with 2) pre-modern, non-Western forms of social organization.

But it's Levin's very logic that would be more *in line* with the many global traditions of the world, in which the norms of the group supersede the whims of the individual. The self is everywhere subjugated to the whole  until very recent history. Levin would say that an unconstrained expressive individualism is what's significantly threatening our current institutions, which is not at all the same thing as nostalgia for an old order! We need liberal individualism to shed the most repressive forms of institutionalized groupthink, for sure. *And* some of the older forms of constraining behavioral norms — traditions of virtue ethics, generational thinking,  should be recovered for their 

