---
title: ask people questions
date: 2024-06-19 14:10:00 -04:00
---

If you're the parent of adolescents, like me, you might also be tracking along with the data about how marriage and cohabiting rates are down among Millenials and Gen Z. We can talk all day about all the reasons that might be, but I want to suggest one stupefyingly obvious thing you can teach your kids to do if they eventually want to be in long-term committed relationships. Teach them to ask people questions, and listen to the answers, and then to ask follow-up questions. Why, *why* is this so hard?? Parents don't teach it because they themselves — *most people* — most Americans, maybe? — are bad at it. I regularly go to parties and ask people questions, after which they answer, and then pause silently to await the next lob. (And yes, this is more common in men than women.) They have no skills in reciprocity at all?? They cannot cede the floor and admit to being beginners at some subject?? They are *trying* to appear boorish and self-involved?? I can stop, of course, and often I find some way to exit after a time. But my freakish novelty-seeking curiosity usually wins out. There's always something interesting to know more about. So, fine, I learn things regularly. People like talking to me, and they like talking to my husband. Of course they do! We ask questions! But a one-sided interview is not a conversation. Teach your kids — your sons, especially — to ask questions, to be interested in people, and real relationships will follow.