---
title: ravelstein
date: 2025-09-06 15:29:00 -04:00
---

I got interested in Saul Bellow's *Ravelstein* after hearing [a lengthy conversation between Matt Sitman and Sam Adler-Bell](https://www.dissentmagazine.org/blog/know-your-enemy-unraveling-allan-bloom-and-saul-bellow/) talking about Alan Bloom, *The Closing the American Mind*, the friendship between Bloom and Bellow, and then Bellow's project after Bloom died. Bloom requested that Bellow fictionalize him lightly, try to convey some of his ideas or his personhood, in the narrative form that Bellow was so good at. And I got interested because I am interested in the novel of ideas, even the most thinly veiled kind. So one of my favorite novels is Elizabeth Costello by J.M. Cutzey. I'm sure it's not for everyone. precisely because it contains within it essays and argumentation that are put into the mouth of a professor. But for me, it is a tremendously exciting example of a kind of tacking back and forth between and among ideas in the kind of mind and embodiment of a character who has devoted her life to ideas and who finds herself kind of at the end of her career unable to filter herself as well and to hide some of the just the deep weariness that she feels with the performance of the professor role and her simultaneous weariness and kind of moral clarity. I find this incredibly compelling. And so I thought that may be what Ravelstein was about, but it's not so much that. It made me more interested in Bloom, for sure. So here's point one I became I was more interested in Bloom having read this book rather than the less. And that may sound obvious, but in fact, it's not obvious. I certainly have watched biopic documentaries and read books about people in whom I had less interest after watching or reading about them. which may be a fault of the an aesthetic error in the rendering or in the nature of the character, him or herself. But in Bloom's case, I found him, I find him much more interesting. And I've never read Closing of the American Mind, but I've read lots about it because it was such a sensation when I was very young adult. Secondly, Bello achieves writing about the death of Bloom. I mean, it's so clearly the kind of apex of the novel without an actual death scene. And this is a really interesting accomplishment, both walking him up to the kind of frailty and the weakening of his body, and the kind of aftermath of his death that shows up in Bella's life and remembering him, but somehow skates past the melodrama, maybe, of what would have been a death scene. And it is very moving the way that Raveldean appears in the very end of the book, and I think that achieves something quite remarkable of rendering the end of a life. Surely the best line in the book is love that operates, I think, at the edge of doom is not a modern project. I'll be thinking about that for a very long time. It says so much about the kinds of things that I'm thinking about right now. Fourth, Belos says bloom was an am affam, a man of women, not a lady's man and not a not a What was the other, what's the other. Not a lady's man, but also not a. What is the other. Not a flirt and not something else. But an um a, the man man who enjoys women, and I think this is actually a category and a equality that I would love to see revived and sharpened because I recognize it as a distinction. There are certainly men who enjoy women in the sense that they enjoy looking at women and flirt with women and are, you know, recognizably interested in women as such. But it's not quite that. There's certainly men who are interested in women as, you know, kind of fellow brains, you know, who can, who read women and who cite them and perhaps think of them as interlocutors. But there is another quality of a man who enjoys women full stop, who observes them, who waits to hear their answers, who thinks of them as having lively interior worlds, and also enjoys, yes, their difference, their bodily difference, or their, you know, the way they look, the way they socialize. But it has none of the, you know, kind of none of the fetishizing of difference and the kind of relying on difference. There is something kind of like holy, you know, discovery based and curious in the way these men enjoy women and it's a beautiful thing to see. And not everyone can pull it off, to be honest. I mean, the men who enjoy women as interlocutors, some of them, I can see, are being exceedingly cautious and chaste in making sure that they don't cross into flirtation. And I fully understand and respect and appreciate that. So it's not a failing on their part. There is just something that I notice about the femme who can ride that line of deep enjoyment without relying on stereotypes.